# 100 DAYS OF CODE : Day 7
*Rust book chapters*

## Variables and Mutability
Variables are immutable by default, meaning that they cannot be modified when assigned to. Rust encourages you to use immutable variables, since it can mitigate bugs in projects caused be reassignment or modifications.

```rust
fn main()
{
    let i = 0;
    println!("The value of i is: {}", i);
    i = 6;
    println!("The value of i is: {}", i);
}
```
***This code fails to compile, since it tries to reassign an immutable variable.***

Running with `cargo run` will show you an error message if you try to run the code above. The error message will indicate that the variable is immutable and thus cannot be reassigned.

Variables are immutable by default, but can be made mutable with the `mut` keyword. We can't always work with immutable variables, since we will need to modify a variable at some point in our program. We can fix the previous example with the `mut` keyword:

```rust
fn main()
{
    let mut i = 0;
    println!("The value of i is: {}", i);
    i = 6;
    println!("The value of i is: {}", i);
}
```
***Our code can now compile and `i` is now allowed to be modified.***

## The differences with Variables and Constants
An immutable variable would remind you about another commong programming type, the `const`ant. Like an immutable variable, it cannot be modified, so the `mut` keyword will not work with `const`.

A constant can be declared in any scope, including the global scope. Constants have another difference, they must only be set with a constant expression, which is not a result from a function call or anything else that can be calculated at runtime. Here's a small example:

```rust
const MAX_HEALTH: u32 = 100_000;
```

## Shadowing
Shadowing is an interesting topic and is ***very*** useful when we have immutable variables, since we are able to declare a new variable with the same name, which does not have to be the same type.

```rust
fn main()
{
    let x = 5;
    let x = x * 2;
    let x = x * 4;

    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
}
```

This proves useful if you want to convert the initial type into another type through parsing or other means, so you don't need to have two or more variations of the same variable. An example may be:

```rust
let spaces = "    ";
let spaces = spaces.len();
```

In this example we only care about the amount of spaces provided, so we assign the first spaces variable with a `&str` and then immediatly set a new version of spaces to a `usize`. Since rust is a statically typed language, we are not allowed to assign a type to a variable specified as another type:

```rust
let mut spaces = "    ";
spaces = spaces.len();
```
***We will hit an error, as we cannot assign a `usize` to a `&str` value.***

## Data Types
Rust supports many data types that will help you on your journey through systems programming. Although you don't have to assign a variables type, you will have to specify a type through functions and other structures. For the most part, the Rust compiler is able to infer the type based on hopw it is used, so with this example, we can assign an integer and it will assign it as an `i32` without us explicitly writing it.

```rust
let i = 5;
```

### Scalar Types
Rust comes packed with four primary scalar types: integers, floating point, booleans and characters. These types can be recognised from other languages.


### Integer Types
| Length | Signed | Unsigned |
| ------ | ------ | -------- |
| 8-bit  | i8     | u8       |
| 16-bit | i16    | u16      |
| 32-bit | i32    | u32      |
| 64-bit | i64    | u64      |
| 128-bit| i128   | u128     |
| arch   | isize  | usize    |

---

Each variant has a signed and unsigned type. Signed and unsigned refers to whether a number is allowed to hold negative numbers or not. If it is signed, it is able to be negative otherwise it is positive only.

The `isize` and `usize` types depend entirely on the system architecture. If the system is 32-bit, it will be 32-bit otherwise it will be a 64-bit integer.

| Number Literals | Example |
| --------------- | ------- |
| Decimal         | 98_321  |
| Hex             | 0xff    |
| Octal           | 0o77    |
| Binary          | 0b11_00 |
| Byte (u8 only)  | b'A'    |

---

### The Character Type
Rust's `char` type is four bytes long and represents Unicode, which means it is capable of holding more than ASCII. Accented letters, Japanese and event emojis. In other languages, the `char` type might only be similar to `u8` which can only hold 256 values.

### Tuple Type
A tuple is a special type that is able to hold groups of values of varying types. Tuples are fixed-size, which means they cannot grow or shrink once they have been assigned. Tuples have similar syntax to other languages that support them:

```rust
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 3.14, 1);
```

Tuples can be destructured into several variables to be used individually.

```rust
let tup = (500, 3.14, 1);
let (x, y, z) = tup;

println!("The value of x, y, z: {}, {}, {}", x, y, z);
```

Tuples also allow for pattern matching, which allows us to index individual elements, without the need to destructure it.

```rust
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 3.14, 1);

let five_hundred = tup.0;
let pi = tup.1;
let one = tup.2;
```

### The Array Type
Arrays are always useful when you need to hold a fixed-size collection of variables. Unlike a tuple though, an array must contain the same value type. In Rust, we use a square bracket notation to assign them:

```rust
let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
```

An array is always allocated on the stack and will always have a fixed number of elements. The array isn't a flexible type that allows for dynamic modifications, this is where a vec comes in, but will be discussed later.

If you would like to specify an arrays type, you can do so by:

```rust
let arr: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

Here we create an array of `i32` with the length of 5. It is also possible to initialise an array with a default value:

```rust
let arr = [3; 5];
```

This will create an array with the length of five, filling each element with the number 3. Accessing an array is almost identical to other languages, where you will use the square brackets to index the values:

```rust
let arr = [3; 5];

println!("Value at index 2: {}", arr[2]);
```