# 100 DAYS OF CODE : Day 26
*Zig*

I have started learning Zig recently and have been reading quite a lot of documentation, learning materials and other external learning sources. This is where my written sections will come to light, since documentation and learning material isn't very common because of how young the language is. I plan to write notes on sections I am not entirely certain about and sections I need to learn.

## Data Types
Zig is not different to other programming langauges, it has all the same data types included, it also allows for underscores in number literals as Rust does. With the idea of Rust in mind, Zig does share a fair count of similarities which makes it easier to jump between.

*Data types*
```zig
const std = @include("std");
const print = std.debug.print;
const assert = std.debug.assert;

pub fn main() void
{
    // Integers
    const one_plus_one: i32 = 1 + 2;
    print("1 + 1 = {}\n", .{ one_plus_one });

    // floats
    const seven_div_three: f32 = 7.0 / 3.0;
    print("7.0 / 3.0 = {}\n", .{ seven_div_three });

    // Boolean
    const is_true: bool = true;

    // Optional
    var optional_u32: ?u32 = null;
    optional_u32 = 32;
    assert(optional_value != null);

    // Error union
    var number_or_error: anyerror!i32 = error.ArgNotFound;
    number_or_error = -20;
}
```

Zig has quite a few primitive types:
|   Type    |   Description         |
| --------- | -----------------     |
| i8-128    | Signed integer        |
| u8-128    | Unsigned integer      |
| isize     | Pointer sized int     |
| usize     | Unsigned pointer sized int    |
| f16-128   | Floating point        |
| bool      | Boolean               |
| void      | 0-bit type            |
| noreturn  | Similar to break, continue, return, unreachable and while |
| type      | The type of types     |
| anyerror  | An error code         |
| comptime_int  | Compile-time known int |
| comptime_float | Compile-time known float |

The zig compiler also operates as a fully functioning C/C++ compiler which extends this list to have C variants of the primitive types. These types are all prefixed with "c_".

C Type:
- c_short
- c_ushort
- c_int
- c_uint
- c_long
- c_ulong
- c_longlong
- c_ulonglong
- c_longdouble
- c_void

There are also a few primitive values provided:

| Name              | Description           |
| -----             | -----------------     |
| true and false    | bool values           |
| null              | Used for optionals    |
| undefined         | Used to leave value unspecified |

There are some other types that Zig has, which other languages don't support as easily or at all. These rather cool types are bit-width integers by using the identifier `i` or `u`.

*Example of bit widths:*
```zig
const one_bit: u1 = 1;
const two_bit: i2 = -2;
```

These prove very useful when you only require less than 8 bits, which may not be always be the case, but it does not require any bitwise operations or strange manual alignments/packing etc.

### Globals
As in C, we are able to use global variabless in Zig. These **do not** have to be declared with the `const` keyword and are able to be mutable.

### Mutability
Something like mutability is not explicitly expressed as it is in Rust with its keyword `mut`. Mutability is handled with the `const` keyword, which also works on pointers allowing them to not change the address they point to.

### Initialisation
In Zig a value must be initialised, the `undefined` primitive makes that easier. If a variable cannot be initialised, but will be later on in the code, you can set it to `undefined`. This is a special type that can be used for any type.

*Zig will write 0xaa to undefined memory in debug mode, this makes it easier to catch bugs.*

```zig
var x: i32 = undefined;
var hello: *const [5:0]u8 = undefined;

hello = "Hello";
x = 20;
```

### Comptime
Unique to Zig, the `comptime` keyword exists to allow more control over variables and computation within the program. Any variable noted by `const` is marked as comptime, as it is known at compile-time.

Comptime has the ability to be passed into functions, parameters. This is how Zig has achieved Generics.

```zig
fn max(comptime T: type, a: T, b: T) T
{
    return if (a > b) a else b;
}

fn biggestFloat(a: f32, b: f32) f32
{
    return max(f32, a, b);
}

fn biggestInt(a: i32, b: i32) i32
{
    return max(i32, a, b);
}
```

This won't work for something like a bool, but we can change the body to compensate for that type.

```zig
fn max(comptime T: type, a: T, b: T) T
{
    if (T == bool) return a or b;
    return if (a > b) a else b;
}
```

## String literals
Strings are handled a little different to every other language, THERE ARE NO STRING OR CHARACTER TYPES! All strings are handled as arrays of `u8` but also supports UTF-8 encoding.

```zig
// Null-terminated string
const string: *const [5:0]u8 = "hello";
```

## Pointers
Pointers are very similar to how they work in C/C++, you have a value and can reference an object with a pointer, with the potential of altering the data it points to.

You will always be able to make a `constant` pointer to a variable, but not a `var` pointer to a constant. This comes back to mutability, immutable data cannot be coerced to mutable as it prevents any mistakes and potential security issues.

```zig
// Variables
var foo: u8 = 5;
const bar: u8 = 26;

// &foo is of type "*u8" (mutable)
// &bar is of type "*const u8" (immutable)
```

With that knowledge, we can make sure that we are able to have pointers to either mutable or immutable data, which makes bug chasing a lot easier. In the example we would have a reference to the `const bar` but it's possible to have a variable pointer to `foo` while leaving it as immutable like so:

*Usinging a variable pointer, but immutably pointing to variable data:*
```zig
var ptr_imm: *const u8 = &foo;
```

*Using a pointer to change a u32 variable*
```zig
fn multiply(value: *u32) void
{
    value.* *= 2;
}

test "c-like pointer"
{
    var x: u32 = 128;
    var y: *u32 = &x;

    // Dereference and add to x through y
    y.* += 32;
    multiply(&x);
}
```