# 100 DAYS OF CODE : Day 8
*Rust book chapters*

## Using an if in a let Statement
Since an `if` is an expression, it is possible to use it on the right hand side of a `let` statement.

```rust
fn main()
{
    let condition = true;
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

    println!("The value of number is: {}", number);
}
```

In the previous example, both results were of the same value, if you were to change one of them to a `&str` it would be considered a mismatched type.

```rust
fn main()
{
    let condition = true;
    // This will cause an error since the values are not of the same type
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { "six" };

    println!("The value of number is: {}", number);
}
```

Compiling this code will lead us to an error, since the types returned don't match. Both arms of the `if` `else` need to have the same type for Rust to compile.

## Loops
*loop, while and for*

### The `loop`
The `loop` keyword tells Rust to execute the block of code indefinitely until it is explicitly told to stop.

```rust
fn main()
{
    loop 
    {
        println!("Hello again!");
    }
}
```

If we were to compile the program, we would see "Hello again!" printing constantly and we would have to terminate it ourselves. We don't usually want to start an infinite loop without some means of escaping it, this is where the `break` keyword comes in.

The `break` keyword is special in Rust, since it is able to return a value from the loop. We may only use a loop to repeat code blocks until we get a certain value:

```rust
fn main()
{
    let mut counter = 0;

    let result = loop
    {
        counter += 1;

        if counter == 10
        {
            break counter * 2;
        }
    };
    
    println!("The result is {}", result);
}
```

If a collection were to have a length, we can use another loop to pass through every item within it.

```rust
fn main()
{
    let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    for element in arr.iter()
    {
        println!("The value is: {}", element);
    }
}
```

When we run this code, it will print out every number held in `arr`. The `for` loop can help eliminate a chance of bugs, since it only ever iterates over elements that are within a list of some description. We can make a simple countdown like so:

```rust
fn main()
{
    for number in (1..4).rev()
    {
        println!("{}!", number);
    }
    println!("LIFT OFF!");
}
```

This is a much nicer implementation of other examples above, since the collection isn't used elsewhere.